The key benefit of an Image Processing Based Fire Detection System is the ability to provide an early warning. For fire detection, this system may be implemented and tested at almost any place in a business structure, malls, and a variety of other public venues. The camera is used to detect flames in this system. As a result, no further sensors are required to detect fire. The system designed detects flames whenever noticed in its sight and once recognized it rings an alarm and sends email to the respective person. We took images of fire and after using color detection we gave the actual range of colors of fire. Then we used multi-threading to ring the alarm and send email so that the video doesn’t pause while the processor goes into executing the respective function. For the basic image processing in the code, we used the python library cv2 which is actually a computer vision library. For the alarm, the library Beepy was used and as the protocol for email is SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) so for sending the email SMTPlib was used. For the project we created a new email id to avoid any access issues. The email of a project member is used at the moment as the destination email address but once in use, the email can be changed to that of the firefighting department. To incorporate multithreading in the code python’s library threading was used and all the mathematical computations were done using python’s numpy. All the deliverables for the project were met and fire detection is done based upon the data gathered from the webcam. In order to efficiently utilize the resources we did dynamic memory allocation and destroyed the resources used at the end of the program.
